Jetty 12.0.x Documentation: Logging section in operations manual (#9187)
eclipse/jetty.project: documentation/jetty-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/operations-guide/server/server-logging-server.adoc

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.appender.NAME_CONDENSE=`<boolean>::
Specifies whether to condense logger names, so that for example `org.eclipse.jetty.util.QueuedThreadPool` becomes `oeju.QueuedThreadPool`.
Default value is `true`.

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.appender.MESSAGE_ALIGN=`<integer>::
Specifies the column at which the logging `<message>` should be printed.
The value `0` specifies no alignment.
Default value is `0`.

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.appender.MESSAGE_ESCAPE=`<boolean>::
Specifies whether to escape ISO control characters such as `\r` or `\n` present in the message.
Character `\r` is replaced with `<` and character `\n` is replaced with `|`; all other ISO control characters are replaced with `?`.
Default value is `false`.

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.appender.ZONE_ID=`<timezone id>::
Specifies the timezone ID (such as `PST`, or `America/Los_Angeles` or `GMT-8:00`) for the `<datetime>` part of the logging line.
The empty string specifies the `UTC` timezone.
Default value is the local timezone.

`com.example.STACKS=`<boolean>::
Specifies whether to hide stack traces for some arbitrary logger tree `+com.example.*+`.

> Default value is `true`

Reviewer: Move this section up where `.LEVEL` is defined, as they are similar.
The default is `false`.

Also add this (before the default):

```
The exception type and message are logged normally; only stack traces are hidden.
```

[[og-server-logging-server]]
===== Server Logging

Jetty uses the link:http://slf4j.org/[SLF4J] API for its logging.
SLF4J is a generic abstraction layer that is supported by many different logging frameworks (or SLF4J _bindings_).

> Jetty provides a default binding via the `jetty-slf4j-impl` Maven artifact, but you can plug Jetty into the logging framework (or SLF4J _binding_) xref:og-server-logging-server-custom[of your choice].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jetty provides a default binding via the `jetty-slf4j-impl` Maven artifact, but you can plug in the SLF4J _binding_ xref:og-server-logging-server-custom[of your choice] provided by other logging frameworks.
```

Jetty's server logging is enabled by default with the `logging` Jetty module.
You typically won't have to enable the `logging` module directly, since it is a transitive dependency of the `server` module, and thus pulled in by many of the most commonly used modules.

The `logging` module is a xref:og-modules-names[_virtual_ module] and its default implementation is provided by the `logging-jetty` Jetty module, which uses the Jetty SLF4J binding.

[[og-server-logging-server-default]]
====== Default Configuration

Jetty's default SLF4J binding uses an _appender_ (`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.StdErrAppender`) to format a logging message with metadata (like a timestamp) before sending it to `System.err`.
The default `StdErrAppender` format is:

----
<datetime>:<level>:<logger name>:<thread name>:<message>
----

where `<datetime>` is a timestamp with the format `yyyy-MM-dd HH:mm:ss.SSS`.

> You can configure the appender via a file named `jetty-logging.properties`, which must be found in the xref:og-start-start-class-path[class-path].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure the appender via a file named `jetty-logging.properties`, which must be found in the server xref:og-start-start-class-path[class-path].
```

> When you enable the `logging-jetty` module -- either directly or by transitive dependency, as in the following example -- Jetty automatically generates `jetty-logging.properties` for you in `$JETTY_BASE/resources/`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you enable the `logging-jetty` module -- either directly or by transitive dependency, as in the following example -- Jetty automatically generates `jetty-logging.properties` file in `$JETTY_BASE/resources/`:
```

----
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --add-modules=http
----

[source,subs=quotes,options=nowrap]
----
include::jetty[args="--add-module=http",highlight="(logging-jetty *transitively enabled|copy.*\.properties)"]
----

> You can specify the following configuration options in `jetty-logging.properties`:

Author: I've described a few additional configuration options in this document. All of these were drawn from the default `jetty-logging.properties` generated by the `logging-jetty` module (https://github.com/eclipse/jetty.project/blob/jetty-10.0.x/jetty-home/src/main/resources/modules/logging/jetty/resources/jetty-logging.properties).

Do you happen to know if this is now a comprehensive list of the available options? If not, are the other configuration options documented anywhere?

`org.eclipse.jetty.LEVEL=`<logging level>::

> Sets the logging level used by Jetty globally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sets the logging level for the logger tree starting at `org.eclipse.jetty`.
Every Jetty class is in this package or in a sub-package, so this enables _full_ DEBUG logging for Jetty.
This is very expensive and only necessary in case of xref:og-troubleshooting-logging[troubleshooting].
```

> You can specify any of the usual SLF4J logging levels -- `TRACE`, `DEBUG`, `INFO` (default), `WARN` and `ERROR` -- plus two additional levels: `ALL` (an alias for `TRACE`) and `OFF` (disable logging entirely).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can specify any of the usual SLF4J logging levels -- `TRACE`, `DEBUG`, `INFO` (default), `WARN` and `ERROR` -- plus two additional levels: `ALL` (an alias for `TRACE`) and `OFF` (disables logging entirely).
```

Specifies whether to condense logger names, so that for example `org.eclipse.jetty.util.QueuedThreadPool` becomes `oeju.QueuedThreadPool`.
Default value is `true`.

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.appender.MESSAGE_ALIGN=`<integer>::
Specifies the column at which the logging `<message>` should be printed.
The value `0` specifies no alignment.
Default value is `0`.

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.appender.MESSAGE_ESCAPE=`<boolean>::
Specifies whether to escape ISO control characters such as `\r` or `\n` present in the message.
Character `\r` is replaced with `<` and character `\n` is replaced with `|`; all other ISO control characters are replaced with `?`.
Default value is `false`.

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.appender.ZONE_ID=`<timezone id>::
Specifies the timezone ID (such as `PST`, or `America/Los_Angeles` or `GMT-8:00`) for the `<datetime>` part of the logging line.
The empty string specifies the `UTC` timezone.
Default value is the local timezone.

`com.example.STACKS=`<boolean>::
Specifies whether to hide stack traces for some arbitrary logger tree `+com.example.*+`.
Default value is `true`

`org.eclipse.jetty.logging.jmx.context=`<class name>::

> Configures the JMX context name, for use when xref:og-jmx[debugging via a JMX console].

Author: I don't really understand what this configuration option does, and Google didn't help me much in figuring out how one might use this feature, so my description here is pretty lackluster.

Reviewer 2: Those options are defined in [StdErrAppender](https://github.com/eclipse/jetty.project/blob/jetty-12.0.x/jetty-core/jetty-slf4j-impl/src/main/java/org/eclipse/jetty/logging/StdErrAppender.java) which has a lack of javadoc, so hard to say how good your descriptions are.   Is there any magic we can do to put the descriptions in the javadoc and extract them into the documentation?

Some more logging options are configured in [JettyLoggerConfiguration](https://github.com/eclipse/jetty.project/blob/jetty-12.0.x/jetty-core/jetty-slf4j-impl/src/main/java/org/eclipse/jetty/logging/JettyLoggerConfiguration.java).  It has a thin smear of javadoc, but nothing substantive.

Finally, the jmx config is done by [JettyLoggerFactory](https://github.com/eclipse/jetty.project/blob/jetty-12.0.x/jetty-core/jetty-slf4j-impl/src/main/java/org/eclipse/jetty/logging/JettyLoggerFactory.java).

Together, these classes cover all the options you have listed, and I can see no more.

@joakime it might be good to give gregp a few paragraphs describing how these 3 classes work together to configure logging... again maybe in the javadoc and/or in the documentation itself.

Reviewer: @gregpoulos please leave these out because they are implementation details and perhaps even leftovers (I don't see `jmxContext` being used anywhere).
All the rest is good.

Author: ACK

[[og-server-logging-server-custom-logback]]
====== Logging with LogBack

To enable the `logging-logback` module, run:

----
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --add-modules=logging-logback,http
----

> Since LogBack is released under a license that is different from Jetty's, you will be prompted to accept the LogBack license:

Reviewer: Restore the `.` at the end of the line.

    └── logging-log4j2.ini
----

Jetty downloaded the required Log4j2 `+*.jar+` files, and created a `$JETTY_BASE/resources/log4j2.xml` file that you can configure to customize your Log4j2 logging.

Please refer to the link:https://logging.apache.org/log4j/2.x/manual/configuration.html[Log4j2 configuration manual] for more information about how to configure Log4j2.

[[og-server-logging-server-bridges]]
====== Bridging Logging to SLF4J

When you use libraries that provide the features you need (for example, JDBC drivers), it may be possible that those libraries use a different logging framework than SLF4J.

SLF4J provides link:http://www.slf4j.org/legacy.html[bridges for legacy logging APIs] that allows you to bridge logging from one of these legacy logging frameworks to SLF4J.
Once the logging is bridged to SLF4J, you can use Jetty's xref:og-server-logging-server-default[default configuration] or a xref:og-server-logging-server-custom[custom configuration] so that your logging is centralized in one place.

Jetty provides several modules out of the box for bridging older logging frameworks to SLF4J:

> * `logging-jul-capture` for bridging from `java.util.logging`

Author: I was able to find these three modules by simply running `java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --list-modules=* | grep bridge`. Are there any others?

It looks like only `logging-jul-capture` is documented in the existing docs. If the other bridges are sufficiently similar in functionality, we may not have to fully document them separately, but it would probably be good to acknowledge them in a little more detail.

Reviewer: I would rather mention that they are similar but very obsolete and should not be used anymore, and only document `jul` (which is in the JDK and will never go away).

Author: Got it. I added a warning to not use these older modules.

* `logging-jcl-capture` for bridging from Jakarta Commons Logging (JCL)
* `logging-log4j1-capture` for bridging from Apache Log4j

[[og-server-logging-server-bridge-jul]]
====== Bridging from `java.util.logging`

For libraries that use `java.util.logging` as their logging framework, you can enable Jetty's `logging-jul-capture` module:

----
$ java -jar $JETTY_HOME/start.jar --add-modules=logging-jul-capture
----

> The `logging-jul-capture` module implies `--exec` and therefore xref:og-start-start[spawns a second JVM] because it needs to provide the system property `java.util.logging.config.file` (so that `java.util.logging` can read the configuration from the specified file), and because it needs to make available on the System ClassLoader the class `org.slf4j.bridge.SLF4JBridgeHandler`.

Author: This section gets into a level of detail that, while useful and interesting, may be a little esoteric for the average user interested in figuring out logging in Jetty. Perhaps we can move this content somewhere else?

Here's one thought: This section on logging is effectively documenting several different modules, so perhaps we can move the more detailed content into the Jetty Modules section of the documentation by creating new sub-sections for each of the individual logging modules.

Reviewer 2: We should have a section somewhere in the documentation that already describes the `--exec` option.  So in logging, all we need do is have a note that says something like: Since JUL logging needs to be configured on the JVM command line, this module implies the --exec option (with link to other documentation)

Reviewer: @gregpoulos my take is that these sections need to exist, be very short, and point to the module documentation, but they do need to exist here because they explain how to configure the server logging.

Like you suggest I would move this paragraph to a more detailed documentation of the `logging-jul-capture` module, but keep here the section about bridging to `jul` (like we have the one for Log4j2).

@gregw we do have a section about `--exec` already.

Reviewer 3: I think I can get rid of this `--exec` (actually `[exec]`) configuration in `logging-jul.mod` and `logging-jul-capture.mod` entirely. (thanks to some niceties that Java 17 gives us)
That would make no logger configuration we ship have an exec requirement.
I'll give it a whirl when I get back (at the end of the month).

Author: @sbordet, I'll hold off on making changes here in light of @joakime's comment.

Reviewer: I would say keep the section for now and let's move on with this PR.
When Joakim reviews the need for --exec, we can update this section.
